Fleet Sampling docs (#334)
memfault/memfault-docs: docs/platform/fleet-sampling.mdx

---
id: fleet-sampling
title: Fleet Sampling
sidebar_label: Fleet Sampling
---

As your fleet grows, it becomes more costly to send, process and store the data

> from each one of your devices. The fleet sampling feature will help keeping the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from each one of your devices. Fleet Sampling will help keeping the
```

Here and in other places, I think we should treat this term as a concepts similar to "Cohort" and write it with uppercase letters. The article does this already on most places but not everywhere.

> costs low by collecting diagnostics and performance data only from a subset of
> your fleet but at the same time provide enough insights to understand issues
> happening across your fleet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
costs low by collecting diagnostics and performance data only from a smaller, yet statistically significant, subset of
your fleet. At large fleet sizes, this smaller "sampled" population of devices provide sufficiently representative data to still provide all relevant insights and to understand issues
as they occur across your fleet.
```

:::note

Fleet Sampling is only supported on the
[Bort SDK](https://github.com/memfault/bort), starting with

> [version 4.2.0](https://github.com/memfault/bort/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#v420---september-14th-2022).

Reviewer: This is not exactly true. On all platforms, data from devices will be dropped upon ingestion if subject to sampling. What we do on Bort is device-side logic to prevent data from being sent but preserved in the holding area for potential later use (especially helpful for logs - which only exist on Android anyway).

I'd scratch this section here and maybe call it out further down.

:::

:::note

Memfault strongly recommends usage of
[Normalized Charts](/docs/platform/charts/#chart-normalization) on Dashboard and
Metric Charts with Fleet Sampling to understand trends across your fleet
correctly since the population of devices reporting issues from the field can
change over time with the updates to diagnostic or performance reporting aspects
of the devices.

e.g. When every device of a million-device fleet crashes once a day this would
normally be 1M crashes per day. However, when only 5% of the devices in the
fleet are set to sent crash reports to Memfault, this might be reduced to
50K/day, which would suggest a drop in crash counts, so to counteract this
skewing of data, chart normalization will instead report 1K₁ₖ (one thousand

> crashes per thousand devices) for both scenarios.

Reviewer: How about "enables Fleet Sampling by default".

:::

> ## Sampling Aspects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Fleet Sampling Aspects
```

SEO

> Each device in the fleet has 3 aspects that represent different core features
> offered by Memfault. See the differences between the aspects and their

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each device in the fleet can be configured by turning on or off specific Fleet Sampling Aspects. See the differences between the aspects and their
```

| Monitoring          | No hourly heartbeats                               | [Batterystats metrics](/docs/android/android-builtin-metrics#battery-and-related-metrics) are uploaded every 2h                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Debugging           | No crash collection                                | Crash report collection (via Bug Reports or Caliper), reboot reasons                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Logging             | No logs, except if they are part of a crash report | Log collection and upload in the case of an overlap with a trace event (see details [here](/docs/android/android-logging/)). <br />Logs that have been already collected on the device and not yet sent will also be uploaded as soon as the device receives the logging resolution change to `On` |

> Your devices won’t be “in the dark” even if all three aspect resolutions are set

Reviewer: The term "resolution" here, throughout the article, and frankly in our UI, is a bit confusing now that reduced this to On/Off.

Should we wat least try to avoid it in the docs? Where "set resolution for an aspect" would become something along the lines of "to turn on/off an aspect" ?

to `Off`: They’ll still continue contacting Memfault to check for OTA updates
and download, be considered as active devices and visible under
[Devices page](https://app.memfault.com/organizations/-/projects/-/devices)
along with their software versions and last check-in times.

> ## Managing aspect resolutions of your devices

Reviewer: Second thought: Maybe just leave as-is so we don't need to rewrite the sentences that refer to the complementary paragraphs – this way, we should be able to ship this more quickly.

## Quotas

If the aspect resolution quota configured for the project is reached, an error
message will be shown at the top of the page when changing the resolution of a
device:
![fleet_sampling_quota_limit_single_device.svg](/img/docs/platform/fleet_sampling_quota_limit_single_device.svg)
_Figure 2: Hitting the quota limit when updating sampling resolution of a single
device_

In order to free up quota, devices with the relevant aspect resolution `On` can
be filtered under
[Device Search](https://app.memfault.com/organizations/-/projects/-/devices) and
their resolution can be set to `Off` in bulk, as explained in
[Setting aspect resolution of multiple devices](#setting-aspect-resolutions-of-multiple-devices)
section.

![fleet_sampling_search_devices_monitoring_on.png](/img/docs/platform/fleet_sampling_search_devices_monitoring_on.png)
_Figure 3: Searching for devices with logging resolution “On”_

Quota and usage information can be accessed under
[Settings → Quotas](https://app.memfault.com/organizations/-/projects/-/settings/quotas).
![fleet_sampling_quota_page.png](/img/docs/platform/fleet_sampling_quota_page.png)
_Figure 4: Quotas and usage information_

> ### Setting aspect resolution(s) of multiple devices

Reviewer: is this the right level of headlines? Making it level 3 makes it appear as if it was details about quotas.

![Screen Shot 2022-12-14 at 11 02 52](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/486904/207565748-b375f3ea-18ea-4deb-8051-da216cac1719.png)

Memfault’s
[Device Search](https://app.memfault.com/organizations/-/projects/-/devices)

> allows one to precisely describe a population of devices before assigning their

Reviewer: ```suggestion
allows you to precisely describe a population of devices before assigning their
```

This is the only time in the doc you're using 3rd person instead of 2nd?

> respective sampling resolutions. Using the search parameters, specific parts of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
respective sampling resolutions. Using the search parameters, specific populations of
```

Trying to gradually introducing the term "device population" across the product

the fleet where the most visibility is needed (i.e. devices experiencing fast
battery discharges/connectivity issues in the past or devices in a specific
cohort) can be defined and their sampling resolutions can be updated

> accordingly. Having such a visibility is also important before rolling out new

Reviewer: ```suggestion
all at once in bulk. Having such a visibility is also important before rolling out new
```

Wanted to emphasize that this is for many and also to introduce the term "bulk" as this is being used in other places in the doc but not here where we explain it.

software versions to be able to proactively monitor the potential negative
effects of the roll out.

![fleet_sampling_turn_on_all_aspects.png](/img/docs/platform/fleet_sampling_turn_on_all_aspects.png)
_Figure 5: Turning on all aspects of all devices in the Test Cohort_

In the event of hitting [quota limits](#quotas) when assigning sampling
resolutions in bulk, a warning message will be presented to the user (see the

> screenshot below). Memfault strongly recommends freeing up the required quota
> for the assignment before continuing with the assignment. **Add why there may be
> surprises if over quota assignment is done for multiple aspects** This can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
screenshot below). You should free up the required quota
for the assignment before continuing with the assignment. This can be
```

The "strongly recommended" sounds weird. I also removed the note "add why there may be surprises" – do we really need that or can we explain this in a comprehensible way?

done via:

> 1. Updating your plan by emailing sales@memfault.com

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Expanding your plan by emailing sales@memfault.com
```

Just curious: Do we have precedence for this in our docs? "Pay here"? I feel we should have a dedicated page for this at some point

> 2. Turning the respective resolutions of some other devices to `Off`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Turning the respective resolutions of some other devices to `Off` by using the same mechanism as a prior step.
```

![fleet_sampling_turn_on_all_aspects_quota_limit.png](/img/docs/platform/fleet_sampling_turn_on_all_aspects_quota_limit.png)
_Figure 6: Turning on all aspects of all devices with software version 1.0.0 and
hitting the quota limit for Logging_

Another option for predictably assigning sampling resolutions is to “limit” the

> number of devices that’ll be affected from the bulk operation: It limits the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
number of devices that will be affected from the bulk operation: It limits the
```

nit: I believe [we once discussed](https://www.notion.so/memfault/How-to-Write-Copy-a5a89c8de6934ba4ad5d8923e1df8c40#d9e0f7893ebb40e1bf15a57450a9073f) "no abbreviations" in our style guide (there's a second place in this doc). I am sure this is very inconsistent throughout our docs in general, though.

assignment to be applied on `the first N devices` that match with the search
criteria and the sorting order. In the example below, the quota for logging is
limited to 10 but 80 devices match the search query `software_version = 1.0.0`:

> Using the limit option, the change will be applied on the last seen 5 devices

Reviewer: This is so cool!

with the `software version` `1.0.0`.

![fleet_sampling_turn_on_all_aspects_with_limit.png](/img/docs/platform/fleet_sampling_turn_on_all_aspects_with_limit.png)
_Figure 7: Limiting the number of devices with software version 1.0.0 that will
be updated_

:::info

The list of devices to be updated with new sampling resolutions will only be
materialized once the request is received upon clicking on “Start Bulk
Operation” button. That means, the assignment will be performed against the
search query that’s used (or against the **whole fleet** in case of no search
query) and the numbers should be taken as an estimation.

This conveys that in the context of the example above (Figure 7), the devices to
be updated may be different than what’s displayed in the search results since
new devices may have contacted Memfault and have a more recent last seen
information in the meantime.

> If devices to be updated with new sampling resolutions need to be precisely
> selected, checkboxes can be used and in this case only the selected devices will
> be updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If devices to be updated with new sampling resolutions need to be precisely
selected, please select them explicitly via the checkboxes in the search result before performing the action.
```

:::

As this operation can take a long time, the result will be communicated via
email to the user initiated the action. The email contains a summary of the

> changes and how many devices are affected by the change:
> 
> ![fleet_sampling_email.png](/img/docs/platform/fleet_sampling_email.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
changes and how many devices are affected by the change.
```

I would not show a screenshot of the email excerpt. It does add little value and keeping it up-to-date will be very difficult.

### Default fleet sampling configuration of new devices

> Memfault will assign best possible resolutions to the newly enrolled devices, as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Memfault will automatically assign resolutions to the newly enrolled devices, as
```

long as the quota limits permit. When a device contacts Memfault for the first
time, the default configuration to be propagated would be:

- Monitoring: `On`
- Debugging: `On`
- Logging: `Off` (as this is only offered for a small set of devices)

In the case of quota limits are reached, the respective aspect with no quota
will be set to `Off` resolution. See
[Setting aspect resolution of multiple devices](#setting-aspect-resolutions-of-multiple-devices)
section to free up quota before a mass roll-out.

## API

Using Memfault’s REST API the devices belonging to a project can be listed
together with their aspect resolutions. See the
[API docs](https://api-docs.memfault.com/#2634f3fb-d137-42a8-b093-e05d420b8932)

> for more information.

Reviewer: If the API cannot be used to assign resolutions today, we should call this out, IMHO. Something like this maybe?

> There is currently no API to set the Fleet Sampling resolution programmatically. Instead, configure Device Attributes via API and perform a bulk assignment searching for matching devices via the frontend as described above.
